so longtime subscribers of my channel
will know that hands down my favorite
planet in the solar system is Sun it's
the prettiest it has the Rings it has
the hexagon storm raging and it's pull
which can we just take a second to just
stare at this cuz oh my universe it's
incredible but it's not just the planet
by itself that makes it my favorite it's
also got some of the best moons in the
solar system like - the Death Star moon
or Tess the eyeball or maybe even Pam
that kinda looks like ravioli but I want
to talk today about Hyperion the sponge
moon I have never seen anything in the
universe quite like the surface of
Hyperion these images are from the
Cassini probe which orbited Saturn for
13 years from 2004 to 2017 and it just
it looks so much like a dried natural
sponge it's uncanny and like a sponge
Hyperion is almost half empty space it
has a very high porosity as essentially
a measure of how porous and material is
essentially a percentage of how much
empty space is in a material so in 2007
Thomas and collaborators actually used
the data from the Cassini mission to
estimate the porosity of Hyperion was
42% are you 42 percent of Iberian is
actually just empty space they
calculated that by working out the mass
and the size of Hyperion from those two
things you can then get the density and
they found that the density was about
half that of water now the other thing
that this data from a Cassini mission
also showed was that Hyperion was mostly
made of water ice so if the density of
an object that supposedly made a water
ice is actually half of water then you
can be pretty sure that a half-ish of
Hyperion is actually empty space it's
this high porosity that's thought to
give Hyperion it
weird-looking surface compare it to this
image of our own moon or even satins
other moon
Phoebe poor old very pockmarked Phoebe
they all have impact craters from the
past you know four and a half billion
years of encountering objects whizzing
around the solar system but the craters
on our moon and on Phoebe are very
different to the ones you see on
Hyperion normally when an object like an
asteroid or a comet impacts on another
object there's a couple of things that
happen to the material on the surface a
lot of it is actually vaporized in the
impact just because of the incredible
heat that's generated by that but a lot
of it will also get excavated ie you'll
get thrown out you can really clearly
see this when you look at craters on the
moon right they have this very clear rim
around the edge where material has been
pushed up and out in the impact then you
can also see the ejected material that
was excavated surrounding it and even
sometimes rays of that ejecting material
extending out from the crater in these
sort of white lines as well now this
will probably be most familiar to people
if you think about what happens when you
cannonball jump into a swimming pool if
you can Ambala the asteroid and the
service of the swimming pool is like the
surface of a moon you can see there's
the ejected water that gets excavated
out some of it which extends in raised
in certain directions and we even end up
creating a rim around the edge of our
crater at the end but the craters on
Hyperion don't look like this they're
very sharp edge they don't have that
characteristic buildup of material
around the rim it's more of sort of like
a little cliff edge downwards and
speaking of cliff edges as well they're
also incredibly incredibly deep craters
unlike the relatively shallow craters we
see elsewhere in the solar system
now when thomas and collaborators in
2007 measured that porosity of Hyperion
they suggested it was that high porosity
that could actually cause this weird
spongy like surface if I Peary on it
almost half empty space then think about
what happens when an object comes in and
impacts with Hyperion the surface is
much more likely to actually get
compressed and squished down like when
you press on the surface of a sponge
instead of the material getting ejected
out and even if material did get ejected
out Hyperion's density is quite low and
so it doesn't have a very high gravity
and so any objective material is much
more likely to just be lost to empty
space than to fall back down and form
that characteristic rim that we see for
other impact craters throughout the
solar system and the result of that
porosity is therefore this incredibly
weird looking and remember weird is a
good thing surface of Hyperion now after
you've gotten over the spongy like
surface if I period on the next thing
you will probably notice is that it is
not round in fact it was the first non
round moon to be detected in the solar
system back in 1848
now these non round potatoey reminiscent
shaped moons are not rare occurrences in
the solar system take Mars as moons for
example Phobos and Deimos they are very
reminiscent of potatoes but Hyperion is
special because it is the largest of the
potato we shaped moons in the solar
system it's not technically the largest
non round moon that goes to Neptune's
moon protists that looks less like a
potato and more the shape of Dungeons &
Dragons dice now the technical term for
this potato enos shape of iberian is
that it's not in hydrostatic equilibrium
ie it's not big enough and therefore
gravity is not strong enough to have
pulled it into a round shape it means
that the pull of gravity is actually
going to be different on different parts
of the surface and Hyperion unlike on
earth which is round and therefore on
average the pull of gravity is pretty
much the same wherever you happen to be
now the reason that Hyperion is this
strange shape is a
very interesting question Mars's moons
Phobos Deimos are thought to be captured
asteroids which built up like many
objects in the solar system from the
rubble that was left over from the
formation of the Sun these bits of
rubble clump together over time and in
some areas you had even larger and
larger clumps that eventually reached
hydrostatic equilibrium and became round
but mostly you ended up with lots of
smaller chunks through all of these
potato we shaped things that now form
the asteroid belts in the Kuiper belts
now the majority of Saturn's small
potato immunes probably are captured
asteroids but that's not the leading
hypothesis for a period and that's for a
couple of reasons the first being that
it is so much larger than any other of
the sort of potato shaped asteroid
things the second reason is because it
rotates very chaotically it doesn't
rotate around a single access say like
the earth and the sort of Saturn itself
does it actually tumbles around through
space with no specific axis of rotation
at all and the third reason is because
of its color Hyperion it's sort of a red
dishy brownie color unlike you know the
typical color of most moons in the solar
system including our own of grey grey
grey grey grey grey grey but it's not
the only moon of Saturn with this
reddish brown color take a look at aya
Pietist often dubbed the walnut moon
because of the ridge around its equator
now aya Peters isn't in shadow there
it's two-tone one side is very bright
and reflects a lot of light and the
other is relatively darker and is more
of that reddish brown color just like
Hyperion now the Voyager mission did a
flyby at both Saturn and its moons back
in the 1980s and one of the things that
the team noticed was that the dark patch
on aya pieces and the surface of
Hyperion were very similar colors so to
explain both that observation and
Hyperion's weird shape Matthews in 1992
came up with the hypothesis that there
used to be a much bigger moon where
Hyperion was but it was destroyed in a
giant impact
would say either another moon or an
asteroid or a comet what was left behind
was this giant chunk of debris which is
now Hyperion but then also a lot of
other smaller fragments of debris which
then landed on Hyperion surface but also
on aya pizzas one of the reasons that we
think it was only on one side of Iapetus
is because eyepieces is tidally locked
with sun that means only one side ever
faces Sun that means it rotates so that
it always keeps one side facing Saturn
at the same time it's day is the same
length is its yeah essentially and that
might sound very strange but that's
exactly what our own moon does as well
right we only ever see the near Side of
the Moon and not the far side the first
time we ever saw the far side you know
was during the space race and we've only
sent something around the back side of
the moon now that hypothesis is very
nice explains very neatly the shape of
my period the color of it and probably
why it's also tumbling very chaotically
as well because it's a remnant of this
giant impact but more recent work by
Cruikshank italian 2007 using data from
the Cassini mission who showed that
although the spectrum of rainbow a
reflected light from aia pizzas Dark
Side and Hyperion is yes very similar
it's also very similar to the reflected
light from another of Saturn's moons
Phoebe remember poor old pockmarked
Phoebe is the next one out from aya
Peters so a different hypothesis to
explain the similar color of Hyperion
and aya Peters is that all of the
impacts that caused that pockmarked
surface on it Phoebe threw out so much
debris into space that was always then
pulled in towards Saturn landed on one
side of aya pizzas and then fully coated
the surface of Hyperion that doesn't
explain the Hyperion's weird shape or
it's chaotic tumbling motion around
Saturn so the jury is definitely still
out on how Hyperion has become
poster child for the weird and wonderful
potato moons of the solar system before
we get to the bloopers a massive thank
you to this week's sponsor brilliant
brilliant is a problem-solving website
that gets you to learn by doing not just
by watching YouTube videos it teaches
you to think like a scientist breaking
down problems into easy-to-understand
chunks with little interactive sessions
that give them a nice fun application so
you know how to apply the knowledge
you're learning they have loads of
astronomy and physics courses that will
teach you the basics underpinning a lot
of the things that I talk about on this
channel if you like the sound of that
then go to brilliant org forward slash
dr. Becky that's dr b e ck y and sign up
for free and just for you guys the first
200 people that go to that link will get
20% off an annual premium subscription
sponsorships like this are great they
keep this channel going allowing me to
just chat science with you guys which is
what i love to do so head over there and
say a big thank you for me alright
second time lucky for this video cuz the
audio is maxed out on the first cup it's
not a bird or a small child making that
noise could you stop so in 2007 thomas
and collaborators used some of the data
from the Cassini mission vision the
Cassini mission now actually Neptune's
moon which moon is what's a call
technically Neptune's moon Proteus is
actually the largest non-round moon but
it doesn't really remember the red
puzzle resemble I am Hyperion arpita's
oh yeah but just if it does I guess
we'll find out in the comments if I've
been pronouncing it right this entire
time or not